1) This book is about a naturally occurring pattern, a way of thinking,
acting and communicating that gives some leaders the ability to
inspire those around them. Although these "natural-born leaders"
may have come into the world with a predisposition to inspire, the
ability is not reserved for them exclusively. We can all learn this
pattern. With a little discipline, any leader or organization can in-
spire others, both inside and outside their organization, to help
advance their ideas and their vision. We can all learn to lead

2)The goal of this book is not simply to try to fix the things that
aren't working. Rather, I wrote this book as a guide to focus on and
amplify the things that do work

3) Armed with every ingredient for success, Samuel Pierpont
Langley set out in the early 1900s to be the first man to pilot an
airplane. Highly regarded, he was a senior officer at the Smithso-
nian Institution, a mathematics professor who had also worked at
Harvard. His friends included some of the most powerful men in
government and business, including Andrew Carnegie and Alexan-
der Graham Bell. Langley was given a $50,000 grant from the War
Department to fund his project, a tremendous amount of money for
the time. He pulled together the best minds of the day, a veritable
dream team of talent and know-how. Langley and his team used the
finest materials, and the press followed him everywhere. People all
over the country were riveted to the story, waiting to read that he
had achieved his goal. With the team he had gathered and ample
resources, his success was guaranteed.
Or was it?

A few hundred miles away, Wilbur and Orville Wright were
working on their own flying machine. Their passion to fly was so
intense that it inspired the enthusiasm and commitment of a ded-
icated group in their hometown of Dayton, Ohio. There was no
funding for their venture. No government grants. No high-level
connections. Not a single person on the team had an advanced
degree or even a college education, not even Wilbur or Orville. But
the team banded together in a humble bicycle shop and made their
vision real. On December 17, 1903, a small group witnessed a man
take flight for the first time in history.

4) It wasn't luck. Both the Wright brothers and Langley were highly
motivated. Both had a strong work ethic. Both had keen scientific
minds. They were pursuing exactly the same goal, but only the
Wright brothers were able to inspire those around them and truly
lead their team to develop a technology that would change the
world. Only the Wright brothers started with Why

5) They aimed to make an impact, a very big impact, even chal-
lenge the way people perceived how the world worked. But these
young revolutionaries did not throw stones or take up arms against
an authoritarian regime. Instead, they decided to beat the system at
its own game. For Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs, the cofounders of
Apple Computer, the battlefield was business and the weapon of
choice was the personal computer.

6) In their first year in business, with only one product, Apple
made a million dollars in revenues. By year two, they did $10 mil-
lion in sales. In their fourth year they sold $100 million worth of
computers. And in just six years, Apple Computer was a billion-
dollar company with over 3,000 employees.
Jobs and Woz were not the only people taking part in the per-
sonal computer revolution. They weren't the only smart guys in the
business; in fact, they didn't know much about business at all. What
made Apple special was not their ability to build such a fast-growth
company. It wasn't their ability to think differently about personal
computers. What has made Apple special is that they've been able to
repeat the pattern over and over and over. Unlike any of their
competitors, Apple has successfully challenged conventional think-
ing within the computer industry, the small electronics industry, the
music industry, the mobile phone industry and the broader
entertainment industry. And the reason is simple. Apple inspires.
Apple starts with Why

7) Dr. King knew that if the civil rights movement was to succeed,
if there was to be a real, lasting change, it would take more than him
and his closest allies. It would take more than rousing words and
eloquent speeches. It would take people, tens of thousands of
average citizens, united by a single vision, to change the country. At
11:00 a.m. on August 28, 1963, they would send a message to Wash-
ington that it was time for America to steer a new course

8) There are leaders and there are those who lead. With only 6 percent
market share in the United States and about 3 percent worldwide,
Apple is not a leading manufacturer of home computers. Yet the
company leads the computer industry and is now a leader in other
industries as well. Martin Luther King's experiences were not
unique, yet he inspired a nation to change. The Wright brothers
were not the strongest contenders in the race to take the first
manned, powered flight, but they led us into a new era of aviation
and, in doing so, completely changed the world we live in

9) Great leaders, in contrast, are able to inspire people to act. Those
who are able to inspire give people a sense of purpose or belonging
that has little to do with any external incentive or benefit to be
gained. Those who truly lead are able to create a following of people
who act not because they were swayed, but because they were
inspired. For those who are inspired, the motivation to act is deeply
personal. They are less likely to be swayed by incentives. Those who
are inspired are willing to pay a premium or endure inconvenience,
even personal suffering. Those who are able to inspire will create a
following of people—supporters, voters, customers, workers—who
act for the good of the whole not because they have to, but because
they want to.

10) The Wright brothers, Apple and Dr. King are just three exam-
pies. Harley-Davidson, Disney and Southwest Airlines are three
more. John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan were also able to inspire.
No matter from where they hail, they all have something in
common. All the inspiring leaders and companies, regardless of size
or industry, think, act and communicate exactly alike

11) people believed the world was flat. This perceived truth impacted
behavior. During this period, there was very little exploration. Peo-
ple feared that if they traveled too far they might fall off the edge of
the earth. So for the most part they stayed put. It wasn't until that
minor detail was revealed—the world is round—that behaviors
changed on a massive scale. Upon this discovery, societies began to
traverse the planet. Trade routes were established; spices were
traded. New ideas, like mathematics, were shared between societies
which unleashed all kinds of innovations and advancements. The
correction of a simple false assumption moved the human race
forward

==============
Page 21 to 22:
==============
12) There is a wonderful story of a group of American car executives
who went to Japan to see a Japanese assembly line. At the end of the
line, the doors were put on the hinges, the same as in America. But
something was missing. In the United States, a line worker would
take a rubber mallet and tap the edges of the door to ensure that it
fit perfectly. In Japan, that job didn't seem to exist. Confused, the
American auto executives asked at what point they made sure the
door fit perfectly. Their Japanese guide looked at them and smiled
sheepishly. "We make sure it fits when we design it." In the
Japanese auto plant, they didn't examine the problem and
accumulate data to figure out the best solution—they engineered
the outcome they wanted from the beginning. If they didn't achieve
their desired outcome, they understood it was because of a decision
they made at the start of the process

What the American automakers did with their rubber mallets is
a metaphor for how so many people and organizations lead. When
faced with a result that doesn't go according to plan, a series of
perfectly effective short-term tactics are used until the desired out-
come is achieved. But how structurally sound are those solutions?
So many organizations function in a world of tangible goals and the
mallets to achieve them. The ones that achieve more, the ones that
get more out of fewer people and fewer resources, the ones with an
outsized amount of influence, however, build products and com-
panies and even recruit people that all fit based on the original
intention. Even though the outcome may look the same, great lead-
ers understand the value in the things we cannot see.

(DataPatterns Does exactly what the American automakers did..!)

13) But if you ask most businesses why their customers are their
customers, most will tell you it's because of superior quality, fea-
tures, price or service. In other words, most companies have no clue
why their customers are their customers. This is a fascinating
realization. If companies don't know why their customers are their
customers, odds are good that they don't know why their employees
are their employees either

14) If most companies don't really know why their customers are
their customers or why their employees are their employees, then
how do they know how to attract more employees and encourage
loyalty among those they already have? The reality is, most busi-
nesses today are making decisions based on a set of incomplete or,
worse, completely flawed assumptions about what's driving their
business
================================================================
                        Universal Truth
================================================================
15) There are only two ways to influence human behavior: you can
manipulate it or you can inspire it.
================================================================

16) And the quickest
way to do that is price again. And so the downward spiral of price
addiction sets in. In the drug world, these addicts are called junkies.
In the business world, we call them commodities. Insurance. Home
computers. Mobile phone service. Any number of packaged goods.
The list of commodities created by the price game goes on and on.
In nearly every circumstance, the companies that are forced to treat
their products as commodities brought it upon themselves. I cannot
debate that dropping the price is not a perfectly legitimate way of
driving business; the challenge is staying profitable

17) For businesses, the short-term benefits of rebates and other ma-
nipulations are clear: a rebate lures customers to pay full price for a
product that they may have considered buying only because of the
prospect of a partial refund. But nearly 40 percent of those custom-
ers never get the lower price they thought they were paying. Call it
a tax on the disorganized, but retailers rely on it.

18) "No one ever got fired for hiring IBM," goes the old adage, de-
scribing a behavior completely borne out of fear. An employee in a
procurement department, tasked with finding the best suppliers for
a company, turns down a better product at a better price simply
because it is from a smaller company or lesser-known brand. Fear,
real or perceived, that his job would be on the line if something
went wrong was enough to make him ignore the express purpose of
his job, even do something that was not in the company's best
interest.

19) Though positive in nature, aspirational messages are most ef-
fective with those who lack discipline or have a nagging fear or
insecurity that they don't have the ability to achieve their dreams on
their own (which, at various times for various reasons, is everyone)

20) Someone who lives a healthy
lifestyle and is in a habit of exercising does not respond to "six easy
steps to losing weight." It's those who don't have the lifestyle that
are most susceptible. It's not news that a lot of people try diet after
diet after diet in an attempt to get the body of their dreams. And no
matter the regime they choose, each comes with the qualification
that regular exercise and a balanced diet will help boost results. In
other words, discipline. 
(discipline in other words my father..!)
Gym memberships tend to rise about 12
percent every January, as people try to fulfill their New Year's
aspiration to live a healthier life. Yet only a fraction of those
aspiring fitness buffs are still attending the gym by the end of the
year. Aspirational messages can spur behavior, but for most, it
won't last.

21) A management consultant friend of mine
was hired by a billion-dollar company to help it fulfill its goals and
aspirations. The problem was, she explained, no matter the issue,
the company's managers were always drawn to the quicker, cheaper
option over the better long-term solution. Just like the habitual
dieter, "they never have the time or money to do it right the first
time," she said of her client, "but they always have the time and
money to do it again."

22) Impressionable youth are not the only ones subject to peer
pressure. Most of us have probably had an experience of being
pressured by a salesman. Have you ever had a sales rep try to sell
you some "office solution" by telling you that 70 percent of your
competitors are using their service, so why aren't you? But what if
70 percent of your competitors are idiots? Or what if that 70 percent
were given so much value added or offered such a low price that
they couldn't resist the opportunity? The practice is designed to do
one thing and one thing only—to pressure you to buy.

To quote my mother, "If your friends put their head in the oven,
would you do that too?" Sadly, if Michael Jordan or Tiger Woods
was paid to do just that, it might actually start a trend.

23) Real innovation changes the course of industries or even society.
The light bulb, the microwave oven, the fax machine, iTunes. These
are true innovations that changed how we conduct business, altered
how we live our lives, and, in the case of iTunes, challenged an
industry to completely reevaluate its business model. Adding a
camera to a mobile phone, for example, is not an innovation— a
great feature, for sure, but not industry-altering. With this revised
definition in mind, even Motorola's own description of its new
product becomes just a list of a few great features: a metal case,
hidden antenna, flat keypad and a thin phone. Hardly "revolution-
ary innovation." Motorola had successfully designed the latest shiny
object for people to get excited about ... at least until a new shiny
object came out. And that's the reason these features are more a
novelty than an innovation. They are added in an attempt to dif-
ferentiate, but not reinvent

24) In the 1970s, there were only two types of Colgate toothpaste.
But as competition increased, Colgate's sales started to slip. So the
company introduced a new product that included a new feature, the
addition of fluoride, perhaps. Then another. Then another. Whit-
ening. Tartar control. Sparkles. Stripes. Each innovation certainly
helped boost sales, for a while at least. And so the cycle continued.
Guess how many different types of toothpaste Colgate has for you
to choose from today? Thirty-two. Today there are thirty-two dif-
ferent types of Colgate toothpaste (excluding the four they make for
kids). And given how each company responds to the "innovations"
of the other, that means that Colgate's competitors also sell a similar
number of variants that offer about the same quality, about the same
benefits, at about the same price. There are literally dozens and
dozens of toothpastes to choose from, yet there is no data to show
that Americans are brushing their teeth more now than they were in
the 1970s. Thanks to all this "innovation," it has become almost
impossible to know which toothpaste is right for you. So much so
that even Colgate offers a link on their Web site called "Need Help
Deciding?" If Colgate needs to help us pick one of their products
because there are too many variations, how are we supposed to
decide when we go to the supermarket without their Web site to
help us?

25) Once again, this is an example of the newest set of shiny objects
designed to encourage a trial or a purchase. What companies clev-
erly disguise as "innovation" is in fact novelty. And it's not only
packaged goods that rely on novelty to lure customers; it's a com-
mon practice in other industries, too. It works, but rarely if ever
does the strategy cement any loyal relationships

26) Apple's iPhone has since replaced the Motorola RAZR as the
popular must-have new mobile phone. Removing all the buttons
and putting a touch screen is not what makes the iPhone innovative,
however. Those are brilliant new features. But others can copy those
things and it wouldn't redefine the category. There is something
else that Apple did that is vastly more significant.
Apple is not only leading how mobile phones are designed, but,
in typical Apple fashion, also how the industry functions. In the
mobile phone industry, it is the service provider, not the phone
manufacturer, that determines all the features and benefits the
phone can offer. T-Mobile, Verizon Wireless, Sprint, AT&T all dic-
tate to Motorola, Nokia, Ericsson, LG and others what the phones
will do. Then Apple showed up. They announced that they would
tell the service provider what the phone would do, not the other
way around. AT&T was the only one that agreed, thus earning the
company the exclusive deal to offer the new technology. That's the
kind of shift that will impact the industry for many years and will
extend far beyond a few years of stock boost for the shiny new
product.
Novel, huh?

27) Leadership is the ability to
rally people not for a single event, but for years. In business,
leadership means that customers will continue to support your
company even when you slip up. If manipulation is the only strat-
egy, what happens the next time a purchase decision is required?
What happens after the election is won?

28) Manipulative techniques have become such a mainstay in
American business today that it has become virtually impossible for
some to kick the habit. Like any addiction, the drive is not to get
sober, but to find the next fix faster and more frequently. And as
good as the short-term highs may feel, they have a deleterious im-
pact on the long-term health of an organization.

29) When Douglas Feirstein and Michael Moran started the com-
pany, they wanted to be the best in the business. They wanted to
transform an industry with the reputation of a back-alley pawn
shop and give it a bit of a Tiffany's sheen. They invested money in
making the experience perfect. They worked to make the customer
service experience ideal. They were both successful entrepreneurs
and knew the value of building a brand and a strong customer
experience. They'd spent a lot of money trying to get the balance
right, and they made sure to explain their difference in direct re-
sponse advertising on various local and national cable stations.
"Better than the similar offers," they'd say. And they were right. But
the investment didn't pay off as expected.

A few months later, Feirstein and Moran made a significant dis-
covery: almost all of their customers did business with them only
once. They had a transactional business yet they were trying to
make it so much more than that. So they stopped trying to make
their service "better than similar offers," and instead settled with
good. Given that most people were not going to become repeat
customers, there weren't going to be any head-to-head comparisons
made to the other services. All they needed to do was drive a
purchase decision and offer a pleasant enough experience that
people would recommend it to a friend. Any more was unneces-
sary. Once the owners of mygoldenvelope.com realized they didn't
need to invest in the things that build loyalty if all they wanted to
do was drive transactions, their business became vastly more effi-
cient and more profitable.

30) Manipulations are a perfectly valid strategy for driving a trans-
action, or for any behavior that is only required once or on rare
occasions. The rewards the police use are designed to incentivize
witnesses to come forward to provide tips or evidence that may
lead to an arrest. And, like any promotion, the manipulation will
work if the incentive feels high enough to mitigate the risk

30) After September 11, there were customers
who sent checks to Southwest Airlines to show their support. One
note that accompanied a check for $1,000 read, "You've been so good
to me over the years, in these hard times I wanted to say thank you
by helping you out." The checks that Southwest Airlines received
were certainly not enough to make any significant impact on the
company's bottom line, but they were symbolic of the feeling
customers had for the brand. They had a sense of partnership. The
loyal behavior of those who didn't send money is almost impossible
to measure, but its impact has been invaluable over the long term,
helping Southwest to maintain its position as the most profitable
airline in history

=================================================================
31) Knowing you have a loyal customer and employee base not only
reduces costs, it provides massive peace of mind. Like loyal friends,
you know your customers and employees will be there for you
when you need them most. It is the feeling of "we're in this
together," shared between customer and company, voter and
candidate, boss and employee, that defines great leaders
=================================================================

32) It's not an accident that doing business today, and being in the
workforce today, is more stressful than it used to be. Peter Why-
brow, in his book American Mania: When More Is Not Enough, argues
that many of the ills that we suffer from today have very little to do
with the bad food we're eating or the partially hydrogenated oils in
our diet. Rather, Whybrow says, it's the way that corporate America
has developed that has increased our stress to levels so high we're
literally making ourselves sick because of it. Americans are
suffering ulcers, depression, high blood pressure, anxiety, and
cancer at record levels. According to Whybrow, all those promises
of more, more, more are actually overloading the reward circuits of
our brain. The short-term gains that drive business in America
today are actually destroying our health

33) The economic crisis that began in 2008 is just another, albeit
extreme, example of what can happen if a flawed assumption is al-
lowed to carry on for too long. The collapse of the housing market
and the subsequent collapse of the banking industry were due to
decisions made inside the banks based on a series of manipulations.
Employees were manipulated with bonuses that encouraged short-
sighted decision-making. Open shaming of anyone who spoke out
discouraged responsible dissent. A free flow of loans encouraged
aspiring homebuyers to buy more than they could afford at all price
levels. There was very little loyalty. It was all a series of
transactional decisions—effective, but at a high cost. Few were
working for the good of the whole. Why would they?—there was no
reason given to do so.

34) What I found so attractive about the golden ratio, however, was
that it had so many applications in so many fields. And even more
significantly, it offered a formula that could produce repeat- able
and predictable results in places where such results might have
been assumed to be a random occurrence or luck. Even Mother
Nature—for most people a symbol of unpredictability—exhibited
more order than we previously acknowledged. Like the golden
ratio, which offers evidence of order in the seeming disorder of
nature, The Golden Circle finds order and predictability in human
behavior. Put simply, it helps us understand why we do what we
do. The Golden Circle provides compelling evidence of how much
more we can achieve if we remind ourselves to start everything we
do by first asking why

35) The Golden Circle is an alternative perspective to existing
assumptions about why some leaders and organizations have
achieved such a disproportionate degree of influence. It offers clear
insight as to how Apple is able to innovate in so many diverse
industries and never lose its ability to do so. It explains why people
tattoo Harley-Davidson logos on their bodies. It provides a clearer
understanding not just of how Southwest Airlines created the most
profitable airline in history, but why the things it did worked. It
even gives some clarity as to why people followed Dr. Martin Lu-
ther King Jr. in a movement that changed a nation and why we took
up John F. Kennedy's challenge to put a man on the moon even after
he died. The Golden Circle shows how these leaders were able to
inspire action instead of manipulating people to act

36) When most organizations or people think, act or communicate
they do so from the outside in, from WHAT to WHY. And for good
reason—they go from clearest thing to the fuzziest thing. We say
WHAT we do, we sometimes say HOW we do it, but we rarely say
WHY we do WHAT we do.

37) Let's look at that Apple example again and rewrite the example
in the order Apple actually communicates. This time, the example
starts with WHY.
Everything we do, we believe in challenging the status quo. We
believe in thinking differently.
The way we challenge the status quo is by making our products
beautifully designed, simple to use and user-friendly.
And we happen to make great computers.
Wanna buy one?
It's a completely different message. It actually feels different from
the first one. We're much more eager to buy a computer from Apple
after reading the second version—and all I did was reverse the
order of the information. There's no trickery, no manipulation, no
free stuff, no aspirational messages, no celebrities.
Apple doesn't simply reverse the order of information, their
message starts with WHY, a purpose, cause or belief that has noth-
ing to do with WHAT they do. WHAT they do—the products they
make, from computers to small electronics—no longer serves as the
reason to buy, they serve as the tangible proof of their cause.

38) The design and user interface of Apple products, though important, are
not enough in themselves to generate such astounding loyalty
among their customers. Those important elements help make the
cause tangible and rational. Others can hire top designers and
brilliant engineers and make beautiful, easy-to-use products and
copy the things Apple does, and they could even steal away Apple
employees to do it, but the results would not be the same. Simply
copying WHAT Apple does or HOW it does it won't work. There is
something more, something hard to describe and near impossible to
copy that gives Apple such a disproportionate level of influence in
the market. The example starts to prove that people don't buy
WHAT you do, they buy WHY you do it.

39) Companies try to sell us WHAT they do, but we
buy WHY they do it. This is what I mean when 1 say they com-
municate from the outside in; they lead with WHAT and HOW

40) When communicating from the inside out, however, the WHY is
offered as the reason to buy and the WHATs serve as the tangible
proof of that belief. The things we can point to rationalize or explain
the reasons we're drawn to one product, company or idea over
another

41) People don't buy WHAT you do, they buy WHY you do it. This is
the reason Apple has earned a remarkable level of flexibility. People
are obviously comfortable buying a computer from Apple. But
people are also perfectly comfortable buying an mp3 player from
them, or a cell phone or a DVR. Consumers and investors are
completely at ease with Apple offering so many different products
in so many different categories. It's not WHAT Apple does that
distinguishes them. It is WHY they do it. Their products give life to
their cause.

42) It is that clear correlation between WHAT they do and
WHY they do it that makes Apple stand out. This is the reason we
perceive Apple as being authentic. Everything they do works to
demonstrate their WHY, to challenge the status quo. Regardless of
the products they make or industry in which they operate, it is
always clear that Apple "thinks different."

43) Apple wanted to give an individual sitting at home the same power as any company.
Apple's WHY, to challenge the status quo and to empower the individual,
is a pattern in that it repeats in all they say and do

44) The music industry was organized to sell albums, a model that
evolved during a time when listening to music was largely an
activity we did at home. Sony changed that in 1979 with the intro-
duction of the Walkman. But even the Walkman, and later the
Discman, was limited to the number of cassette tapes or CDs you
could carry in addition to the device. The development of the mp3
music format changed all that. Digital compression allowed for a
very high quantity of songs to be stored on relatively inexpensive
and highly portable digital music devices. Our ability to walk out of
the house with only one easy-to-carry device transformed music
into something we largely listened to away from home. And the
mp3 not only changed where we listened to music, it also trans-
formed us from an album-collecting culture to a song-collecting
culture. While the music industry was still busy trying to sell us
albums, a model that no longer suited consumer behavior, Apple
introduced their iPod by offering us "1,000 songs in your pocket."
With the iPod and iTunes, Apple did a much better job of com-
municating the value of both the mp3 and the mp3 player relative to
how we lived our lives. Their advertising didn't offer exhaustive
descriptions of product details; it wasn't about them, it was about
us. And we understood WHY we wanted it

45) Apple did not invent the mp3, nor did they invent the technol-
ogy that became the iPod, yet they are credited with transforming
the music industry with it. The multigigabyte portable hard drive
music player was actually invented by Creative Technology Ltd., a
Singapore-based technology company that rose to prominence by
making the Sound Blaster audio technology that enables home PCs
to have sound. In fact, Apple didn't introduce the iPod until twenty-
two months after Creative's entry into the market. This detail alone
calls into question the assumption of a first mover's advantage.
Given their history in digital sound, Creative was more qualified
than Apple to introduce a digital music product. The problem was,
they advertised their product as a "5GB mp3 player." It is exactly the
same message as Apple's "1,000 songs in your pocket." The
difference is Creative told us WHAT their product was and Apple
told us WHY we needed it.
Only later, once we decided we had to have an iPod, did the
WHAT matter—and we chose the 5GB version, 10GB version, and
so on, the tangible details that proved we could get the 1,000 songs
in our pocket. Our decision started with WHY, and so did Apple's
offering
How many of us can say with certainty that, indeed, an iPod is
actually better than Creative's Zen? iPods, for example, are still
plagued with battery life and battery replacement issues. They tend
to just die. Maybe a Zen is better. The reality is, we don't even care if
it is. People don't buy WHAT you do, they buy WHY you do it.
And it is Apple's clarity of WHY that gives them such a remarkable
ability to innovate, often competing against companies seemingly
more qualified than they, and succeed in industries outside their
core business

46) The same cannot be said for their competitors. Although they all
had a clear sense of WHY at some point—it was one of the primary
factors that helped each of them become billion-dollar companies—
over the course of time, all of Apple's competitors lost their WHY.
Now all those companies define themselves by WHAT they do: we
make computers. They turned from companies with a cause into
companies that sold products. And when that happens, price,
quality, service and features become the primary currency to
motivate a purchase decision. At that point a company and its
products have ostensibly become commodities. As any company
forced to compete on price, quality, service or features alone can
attest, it is very hard to differentiate for any period of time or build
loyalty on those factors alone. Plus it costs money and is stressful
waking up every day trying to compete on that level alone. Know-
ing WHY is essential for lasting success and the ability to avoid
being lumped in with others

47) Companies and organizations
with a clear sense of WHY never worry about it. They don't think of
themselves as being like anyone else and they don't have to
"convince" anyone of their value. They don't need complex systems
of carrots and sticks. They are different, and everyone knows it.
They start with WHY in everything they say and do

48) Consider the classic business school case of the railroads. In the
late 1800s, the railroads were the biggest companies in the country.
Having achieved such monumental success, even changing the
landscape of America, remembering WHY stopped being important
to them. Instead they became obsessed with WHAT they did— they
were in the railroad business. This narrowing of perspective
influenced their decision-making—they invested all their money in
tracks and crossties and engines. But at the beginning of the
twentieth century, a new technology was introduced: the airplane.
And all those big railroad companies eventually went out of busi-
ness. What if they had defined themselves as being in the mass
transportation business? Perhaps their behavior would have been
different. Perhaps they would have seen opportunities that they
otherwise missed. Perhaps they would own all the airlines today

49) In his 1961 story about the Sneetches, Dr. Seuss introduced us to
two groups of Sneetches, one with stars on their bellies and the
other with none. The ones without stars wanted desperately to get
stars so they could feel like they fit in. They were willing to go to
extreme lengths and pay larger and larger sums of money simply to
feel like they were part of a group. But only Sylvester McMonkey
McBean, the man whose machine puts "stars upon thars," profited
from the Sneetches' desire to fit in.
As with so many things, Dr. Seuss explained it best. The
Sneetches perfectly capture a very basic human need—the need to
belong. Our need to belong is not rational, but it is a constant that
exists across all people in all cultures. It is a feeling we get when
those around us share our values and beliefs. When we feel like we
belong we feel connected and we feel safe. As humans we crave the
feeling and we seek it out.

50) Our desire to feel like we belong is so powerful that we will go to
great lengths, do irrational things and often spend money to get that
feeling. Like the Sneetches, we want to be around people and
organizations who are like us and share our beliefs. When
companies talk about WHAT they do and how advanced their
products are, they may have appeal, but they do not necessarily
represent something to which we want to belong. But when a
company clearly communicates their WHY, what they believe, and
we believe what they believe, then we will sometimes go to
extraordinary lengths to include those products or brands in our
lives. This is not because they are better, but because they become
markers or symbols of the values and beliefs we hold dear. Those
products and brands make us feel like we belong and we feel a
kinship with others who buy the same things. Fan clubs, started by
customers, are often formed without any help from the company
itself. These people form communities, in person or online, not just
to share their love of a product with others, but to be in the
company of people like them. Their decisions have nothing to do
with the company or its products; they have everything to do with
the individuals themselves

51) Dell selling mp3
players just doesn't feel right because Dell defines itself as a
computer company, so the only things that belong are computers.
Apple defines itself as a company on a mission and so anything
they do that fits that definition feels like it belongs.In 2004, they
produced a promotional iPod in partnership with the iconoclastic
Irish rock band U2. That makes sense. They would never have
produced a promotional iPod with Celine Dion, even though she's
sold vastly more records than U2 and may have a bigger audience.
U2 and Apple belong together because they share the same values
and beliefs. They both push boundaries. It would not have made
sense if Apple released a special iPod with Celine Dion. As big as
her audience may be, the partnership just doesn't align.

52) We are drawn to leaders and organizations that are good at
communicating what they believe. Their ability to make us feel like
we belong, to make us feel special, safe and not alone is part of what
gives them the ability to inspire us. Those whom we consider great
leaders all have an ability to draw us close and to command our
loyalty. And we feel a strong bond with those who are also drawn
to the same leaders and organizations. Apple users feel a bond with
each other. Harley riders are bonded to each other. Anyone who
was drawn to hear Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. give his "I Have a
Dream" speech, regardless of race, religion or sex, stood together in
that crowd as brothers and sisters, bonded by their shared values
and beliefs. They knew they belonged together because they could
feel it in their gut

53) The principles of The Golden Circle are much more than a com-
munications hierarchy. Its principles are deeply grounded in the
evolution of human behavior. The power of WHY is not opinion, it's
biology. If you look at a cross section of the human brain, from the
top down, you see that the levels of The Golden Circle correspond
precisely with the three major levels of the brain.
The newest area of the brain, our Homo sapien brain, is the
neocortex, which corresponds with the WHAT level. The neocortex
is responsible for rational and analytical thought and language.
The middle two sections comprise the limbic brain. The limbic
brain is responsible for all of our feelings, such as trust and loyalty.
It is also responsible for all human behavior and all our decision-
making, but it has no capacity for language.

54) The same is true for other decisions. When a decision feels right,
we have a hard time explaining why we did what we did. Again,
the part of the brain that controls decision-making doesn't control
language, so we rationalize. This complicates the value of polls or
market research. Asking people why they chose you over another
may provide wonderful evidence of how they have rationalized the
decision, but it does not shed much light on the true motivation for
the decision. It's not that people don't know, it's that they have
trouble explaining why they do what they do. Decision-making and
the ability to explain those decisions exist in different parts of the
brain.

55) Richard Restak, a well-
known neuroscientist, talks about this in his book The Naked Brain.
When you force people to make decisions with only the rational
part of their brain, they almost invariably end up "overthinking."
These rational decisions tend to take longer to make, says Restak,
and can often be of lower quality. In contrast, decisions made with
the limbic brain, gut decisions, tend to be faster, higher-quality
de cisions. This is one of the primary reasons why teachers tell stu-
dents to go with their first instinct when taking a multiple-choice
test, to trust their gut. The more time spent thinking about the
answer, the bigger the risk that it may be the wrong one

56) Companies that fail to communicate a sense of WHY force us to
make decisions with only empirical evidence. This is why those de-
cisions take more time, feel difficult or leave us uncertain. Under
these conditions manipulative strategies that exploit our desires,
fears, doubts or fantasies work very well. We're forced to make
these less-than-inspiring decisions for one simple reason—
companies don't offer us anything else besides the facts and figures,
features and benefits upon which to base our decisions. Companies
don't tell us WHY

57) Winning hearts, however, takes more work.
Given the evidence of the natural order of decision-making, I can't
help but wonder if the order of the expression "hearts and minds" is
a coincidence. Why does no one set out to win "minds and hearts"?
The ability to win hearts before minds is not easy. It's a delicate
balance of art and science—another coincidental grammatical
construction. Why is it that things are not a balance of science and
art, but always art before science? Perhaps it is a subtle clue our
language-impaired limbic brain is sending us to help us see that the
art of leading is about following your heart. Perhaps our brains are
trying to tell us that WHY must come first

58) This is the genius of great leadership. Great leaders and great
organizations are good at seeing what most of us can't see. They are
good at giving us things we would never think of asking for. When
the computer revolution was afoot, computer users couldn't ask for
a graphical user interface. But that's what Apple gave us. In the face
of expanding competition in the airline industry, most air travelers
would never have thought to ask for less instead of more. But that's
what Southwest did. And in the face of hard times and
overwhelming odds, few would have asked their country, what can
I do for you over what can you do for me? The very cause upon
which John F. Kennedy introduced his presidency. Great leaders are
those who trust their gut. They are those who understand the art
before the science. They win hearts before minds. They are the ones
who start with WHY

59) The makers of laundry detergent asked consumers WHAT they
wanted from detergent, and consumers said whiter whites and
brighter brights. Not such a remarkable finding, if you think about
it, that people doing laundry wanted their detergent to help get their
clothes not just clean, but very clean. So brands attempted to dif-
ferentiate HOW they got your whites whiter and brights brighter by
trying to convince consumers that one additive was more effective
than another. Protein, said one brand. Color enhancers, said another.
No one asked customers WHY they wanted their clothes clean. That
little nugget wasn't revealed until many years later when a group of
anthropologists hired by one of the packaged-goods companies
revealed that all those additives weren't in fact driving behavior.
They observed that when people took their washing out of the
dryer, no one held it up to the light to see how white it was or
compared it to newer items to see how bright it was. The first thing
people did when they pulled their laundry out of the dryer was to
smell it. This was an amazing discovery. Feeling clean was more im-
portant to people than being clean. There was a presumption that all
detergents get your clothes clean. That's what detergent is supposed
to do. But having their clothes smell fresh and clean mattered much
more than the nuanced differences between which detergent
actually made clothes measurably cleaner.

60) That a false assumption swayed an entire industry to follow the
wrong direction is not unique to detergents. Cell phone companies
believed people wanted more options and buttons until Apple in-
troduced its iPhone with fewer options and only one button. The
German automakers believed their engineering alone mattered to
American car buyers. They were stunned and perplexed when they
learned that great engineering wasn't enough. One by one, the
German luxury car makers begrudgingly added cup holders to their
fine automobiles. It was a feature that mattered a great deal to
commuter-minded Americans, but was rarely mentioned in any
research about what factors influenced purchase decisions. I am not,
for a moment, proposing that cup holders make people loyal to
BMWs. All I am proposing is that even for rationally minded car
buyers, there is more to decision-making than meets the eye.
Literally

61) If we were all rational, there would be no small businesses, there
would be no exploration, there would be very little innovation and
there would be no great leaders to inspire all those things. It is the
undying belief in something bigger and better that drives that kind
of behavior. But it can also control behavior born out of other
emotions, like hate or fear. Why else would someone plot to hurt
someone they had never met?

62) The amount of market research that reveals that people want to
do business with the company that offers them the best-quality
products, with the most features, the best service and all at a good
price is astounding. But consider the companies with the greatest
loyalty—they rarely have all those things. If you wanted to buy a
custom Harley-Davidson, you used to wait six months for delivery
(to give them credit, they've got it down from a year). That's bad
service! Apple's computers are at least 25 percent more expensive
than a comparable PC. There is less software available for their
operating system. They have fewer peripherals. The machines them-
selves are sometimes slower than a comparable PC. If people made
only rational decisions, and did all the research before making a
purchase, no one would ever buy a Mac. But of course people do
buy Macs. And some don't just buy them—they love them, a feeling
that comes straight from the heart. Or the limbic brain.

63) Remember the Honda and the Ferrari? Products are not just
symbols of what the company believes, they also serve as symbols
of what the loyal buyers believe. People with Apple laptop com-
puters, for example, love opening them up while sitting in an air-
port. They like that everyone knows they are using a Mac. It's an
emblem, a symbol of who they are. That glowing Apple logo speaks
to something about them and how they see the world. Does anyone
notice when someone pops open the lid of their HP or Dell
computer? No! Not even the people using the computers care. HP
and Dell have a fuzzy sense of WHY, so their products and their
brands don't symbolize anything about the users. To the Dell or HP
user, their computer, no matter how fast or sleek, is not a symbol of
a higher purpose, cause or belief. It's just a computer. In fact, for the
longest time, the logo on the lid of a Dell computer faced the user so
when they opened it, it would be upside down for everyone else.

64) Nature abhors a vacuum. In order to promote life, Mother Nature
attempts to find balance whenever possible. When life is destroyed
because of a forest fire, for example, nature will introduce new life to
replace it. The existence of a food chain in any ecosystem, in which
each animal exists as food for another, is a way of maintaining
balance. The Golden Circle, grounded in natural principles of
biology, obeys the need for balance as well. As I've discussed, when
the WHY is absent, imbalance is produced and manipulations
thrive. And when manipulations thrive, uncertainty increases for
buyers, instability increases for sellers and stress increases for all

65) It all starts with clarity. You have to know WHY you do WHAT you
do. If people don't buy WHAT you do, they buy WHY you do it, so
it follows that if you don't know WHY you do WHAT you do, how
will anyone else? If the leader of the organization can't clearly ar-
ticulate WHY the organization exists in terms beyond its products
or services, then how does he expect the employees to know WHY
to come to work? If a politician can't articulate WHY she seeks
public office beyond the standard "to serve the people" (the mini-
mum rational standard for all politicians), then how will the voters
know whom to follow? Manipulations can motivate the outcome of
an election, but they don't help choose who should lead. To lead
requires those who willingly follow. It requires those who believe in
something bigger than a single issue. To inspire starts with the
clarity of WHY

=============================================================================
66) Ironically, the most important question with the most elusive
answer—WHY do you do what you do?—is actually quite simple
and efficient to discover (and I'll share it in later chapters). It's the
discipline to never veer from your cause, to hold yourself
accountable to HOW you do things; that's the hardest part. Making
it even more difficult for ourselves, we remind ourselves of our
values by writing them on the wall... as nouns. Integrity. Honesty.
Innovation. Communication, for example. But nouns are not
actionable. They are things. You can't build systems or develop
incentives around those things. It's nearly impossible to hold people
accountable to nouns.
"A little more innovation today if you would please, Bob." And if
you have to write "honesty" on your wall to remind you to do it,
then you probably have bigger problems anyway.
For values or guiding principles to be truly effective they have to
be verbs. It's not "integrity," it's "always do the right thing." It's not
"innovation," it's "look at the problem from a different angle."
Articulating our values as verbs gives us a clear idea ... we have a
clear idea of how to act in any situation.
=============================================================================

67) The Golden Circle offers an explanation for long-term success,
but the inherent nature of doing things for the long term often
includes investments or short-term costs. This is the reason the
discipline to stay focused on the WHY and remain true to your
values matters so much

68) Everything you say and everything you do has to prove what
you believe. A WHY is just a belief. That's all it is. HOWs are the
actions you take to realize that belief. And WHATs are the results of
those actions—everything you say and do: your products, services,
marketing, PR, culture and whom you hire. If people don't buy
WHAT you do but WHY you do it, then all these things must be
consistent. With consistency people will see and hear, without a
shadow of a doubt, what you believe. After all, we live in a tangible
world. The only way people will know what you believe is by the
things you say and do, and if you're not consistent in the things you
say and do, no one will know what you believe.

69) The common solution is hilarious to me. They go out and do
customer research and they ask the customers, what would we have
to tell you for us to be authentic? This entirely misses the point. You
can't ask others what you have to do to be authentic. Being authentic
means that you already know. What does a politician say when told
to be "more authentic"? How does a leader act more "authentically"?
Without a clear understanding of WHY, the instruction is
completely useless

70) Ask the best salesmen what it takes to be a great salesman. They
will always tell you that it helps when you really believe in the
product you're selling. What does belief have to do with a sales job?
Simple. When salesmen actually believe in the thing they are selling,
then the words that come out of their mouths are authentic. When
belief enters the equation, passion exudes from the salesman. It is
this authenticity that produces the relationships upon which all the
best sales organizations are based. Relationships also build trust.
And with trust comes loyalty. Absent a balanced Golden Circle
means no authenticity, which means no strong relationships, which
means no trust. And you're back at square one selling on price,
service, quality or features. You are back to being like everyone else.
Worse, without that authenticity, companies resort to manipulation:
pricing, promotions, peer pressure, fear, take your pick. Effective?
Of course, but only for the short term

71) Southwest did not invent the concept of a low-cost airline. Pacific
Southwest Airlines pioneered the industry—Southwest even copied
their name. Southwest had no first mover's advantage—Braniff In-
ternational Airways, Texas International Airlines and Continental
Airlines were already serving the Texas market, and none was eager
to give up any ground. But Southwest was not built to be an airline.
It was built to champion a cause. They just happened to use an air-
line to do it

72) In the early 1970s, only 15 percent of the traveling population
traveled by air. At that rate, the market was small enough to scare
off most would-be competitors to the big airlines. But Southwest
wasn't interested in competing against everyone else for 15 percent
of the traveling population. Southwest cared about the other 85
percent. Back then, if you asked Southwest whom their competition
was, they would have told you, "We compete against the car and the
bus." But what they meant was, "We're the champion for the
common man." That was WHY they started the airline. That was
their cause, their purpose, their reason for existing. HOW they went
about building their company was not a strategy developed by a
high-priced management consultancy. It wasn't a collection of best
practices that they saw other companies doing. Their guiding
principles and values stemmed directly from their WHY and were
more common sense than anything else

73) In the 1970s, air travel was expensive, and if Southwest was
going to be the champion for the common man, they had to be
cheap. It was an imperative. And in a day and age when air travel
was elitist—back then people wore ties on planes—as the champion
for the common man, Southwest had to be fun. It was an imperative.
In a time when air travel was complicated, with different prices
depending on when you booked, Southwest had to be simple. If
they were to be accessible to the other 85 percent, then simplicity
was an imperative. At the time, Southwest had two price categories:
nights/weekends and daytime. That was it.

74) Cheap, fun and simple. That's HOW they did it. That's how they
were to champion the cause of the common man. The result of their
actions was made tangible in the things they said and did— their
product, the people they hired, their culture and their marketing.
"You are now free to move about the country," they said in their
advertising. That's much more than a tagline. That's a cause. And
it's a cause looking for followers. Those who could relate to
Southwest, those who saw themselves as average Joes, now had an
alternative to the big airlines. And those who believed what South-
west believed became fiercely loyal to the company. They feltl
Southwest was a company that spoke directly to them and directly
for them. More importantly, they felt that flying Southwest said
something about who they were as people. The loyalty that devel-
oped with their customers had nothing to do with price. Price was
simply one of the ways the airline brought their cause to life

75) Manipulation and inspiration both tickle the limbic brain.
Aspirational messages, fear or peer pressure all push us to decide
one way or another by appealing to our irrational desires or playing
on our fears. But it's when that emotional feeling goes deeper than
insecurity or uncertainty or dreams that the emotional reaction
aligns with how we view ourselves. It is at that point that behavior
moves from being motivated to inspired. When we are inspired, the
decisions we make have more to do with who we are and less to do
with the companies or the products we're buying.

76) As with all
decisions, people don't buy WHAT you do, they buy WHY you do
it, and WHAT you do serves as the tangible proof of WHY you do it.
But unless you start with WHY, all people have to go on are the
rational benefits. And chances are you won't get a second date.

78) "I could see Continental's biggest problem the second I walked in
the door in February of 1994," Gordon Bethune wrote in From Worst
to First, the chief executive's firsthand account of Continental's
turnaround. "It was a crummy place to work." Employees were
"surly to customers, surly to each other, and ashamed of their com-
pany. And you can't have a good product without people who like
coming to work. It just can't be done," he recounts.

79) Some would argue that the reason Continental's culture was so
poisonous was that the company was struggling. They would tell
you that it's hard for executives to focus on anything other than
survival when a company is facing hard times. "Once we get profit-
able again," the logic went, "then we will take a look at everything
else." And without a doubt, throughout the 1980s and early 1990s,
Continental struggled. The company filed for Chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy protection twice in eight years—once in 1983 and again in
1991—and managed to go through ten CEOs in a decade. In 1994,
the year Bethune took over as the newest CEO, the company had
lost $600 million and ranked last in every measurable performance
category.

80) But all that didn't last long once Bethune arrived. The very next
year Continental made $250 million and was soon ranked as one of
the best companies to work for in America. And while Bethune
made significant changes to improve the operations, the greatest
gains were in a performance category that is nearly impossible to
measure: trust.

81) With trust comes a sense of value—real value, not just value
equated with money. Value, by definition, is the transference of
trust. You can't convince someone you have value, just as you can't
convince someone to trust you. You have to earn trust by commu-
nicating and demonstrating that you share the same values and
beliefs. You have to talk about your WHY and prove it with WHAT
you do. Again, a WHY is just a belief, HOWs are the actions we take
to realize that belief, and WHATs are the results of those actions.
When all three are in balance, trust is built and value is perceived.
This is what Bethune was able to do

82) Frank Lorenzo,
CEO before Bethune, may have been the leader of Continental, but
Gordon Bethune knew how to lead the company. Those who lead
are able to do so because those who follow trust that the decisions
made at the top have the best interest of the group at heart. In turn,
those who trust work hard because they feel like they are working
for something bigger than themselves.

83) The drive to win is not, per se, a bad thing. Problems arise, how-
ever, when the metric becomes the only measure of success, when
what you achieve is no longer tied to WHY you set out to achieve it
in the first place.

84) Bethune set out to prove to everyone at Continental that if they
wanted to win, they could win. And most of the employees stuck
around to find out if he was right. There were a few exceptions. One
executive who once held up a plane because he was running late
was asked to leave, as were thirty-nine more of the top sixty
executives who didn't believe. No matter how experienced they
were or what they brought to the table, they were asked to leave if
they weren't team players and weren't able to adapt to the new cul-
ture that Bethune was trying to build. There was no room for those
who didn't believe in the new Continental.

85) Bethune knew that building a team to go out and win meant
more than giving a few rah-rah speeches and bonuses for the top
brass if they hit certain revenue targets. He knew that if he wanted
to build a real, lasting success, people had to win not for him, not
for the shareholders and not even for the customer. For the success
to last the employees of Continental had to want to win for
themselves.

86) The reason the human race has been so successful is not because
we're the strongest animals—far from it. Size and might alone do
not guarantee success. We've succeeded as a species because of our
ability to form cultures. Cultures are groups of people who come
together around a common set of values and beliefs. When we share
values and beliefs with others, we form trust. Trust of others allows
us to rely on others to help protect our children and ensure our
personal survival. The ability to leave the den to hunt or explore
with confidence that the community will protect your family and
your stuff until you return is one of the most important factors in
the survival of an individual and the advancement of our species.

87) Most people who are born and raised in one culture will, for
obvious reasons, end up being a reasonably good fit in that culture,
but not always. There are people who grew up in France who never
quite felt like they belonged; they were misfits in their own culture.
So they moved, maybe to America. Drawn to the feelings they had
for America's WHY, they followed the American Dream and
emigrated

=====================================================================
88) And within the big WHY that is America, it breaks down even
further. Some people are better fits in New York and some are better
fits in Minneapolis. One culture is not better or worse than the other,
they are just different. Many people dream of moving to New York,
for example, attracted to the glamour or the perception of
opportunity. They arrive with aspirations of making it big, but they
fail to consider whether they will fit into the culture before they
make their move. Some make it. But so many don't. Over and over,
I've seen people come to New York with big hopes and dreams, but
either couldn't find the job they wanted or they found it but couldn't
take the pressure. They are not dumb or bad or poor workers. They
were just bad fits. They either stay in New York and exert more
effort than they need to, hating their jobs and their lives, or they
move. If they move to a city in which they are better fits— Chicago
or San Francisco or somewhere else—they often end up much
happier and more successful. New York is not rationally better than
other cities, it's just not right for everyone. Like all cities, it's only
right for those who are good fits.
=====================================================================

89) Now consider what a company is. A company is a culture. A
group of people brought together around a common set of values
and beliefs. It's not products or services that bind a company to-
gether. It's not size and might that make a company strong, it's the
culture—the strong sense of beliefs and values that everyone, from
the CEO to the receptionist, all share. So the logic follows, the goal is
not to hire people who simply have a skill set you need, the goal is
to hire people who believe what you believe

90) "Men wanted for Hazardous journey. Small wages, bitter cold,
long months of complete darkness, constant danger, safe return
doubtful. Honour and recognition in case of success."
The only people who applied for the job were those who read the ad
and thought it sounded great. They loved insurmountable odds. The
only people who applied for the job were survivors. Shackleton
hired only people who believed what he believed. Their ability to
survive was guaranteed. When employees belong, they will
guarantee your success. And they won't be working hard and
looking for innovative solutions for you, they will be doing it for
themselves.

91) "You don't hire for skills, you hire for
attitude. You can always teach skills."

=====================================================================
92) Great companies don't hire skilled people and motivate them,
they hire already motivated people and inspire them. People are
either motivated or they are not. Unless you give motivated people
something to believe in, something bigger than their job to work
toward, they will motivate themselves to find a new job and you'll
be stuck with whoever's left.
=====================================================================

93) A few hundred miles away in Dayton, Ohio, Orville and Wilbur
Wright were also building a flying machine. Unlike Langley, the
Wright brothers did not have the recipe for success. Worse, they
seemed to have the recipe for failure. There was no funding for their
venture. No government grants. No high-level connections. The
Wright brothers funded their dream with the proceeds from their
bicycle shop. Not a single person working on the team, including
Orville and Wilbur, had a college education; some did not even fin-
ish high school. What the Wright brothers were doing wasn't any
different from Langley or all the others trying to build a flying ma-
chine. But the Wright brothers did have something very special.
They had a dream. They knew WHY it was important to build this
thing. They believed that if they could figure out this flying ma-
chine, it would change the world. They imagined the benefits to
everyone else if they were successful.

94) Orville and Wilbur preached what they believed and inspired
others in the community to join them in their cause. The proof of
their commitment was self-evident. With failure after failure, most
would have given up, but not the Wright brothers' team. The team
was so inspired that no matter how many setbacks they suffered
they would show up for more. Every time the Wright brothers went
out to make a test flight, so the stories go, they would take five sets
of parts with them, because they knew that's how many times they
were likely to fail before deciding to come home for the day.

95) What Langley and the Wright brothers were trying to create was
exactly the same; both were building the same product. Both the
Wright brothers and Langley were highly motivated. Both had a
strong work ethic. Both had keen scientific minds. What the Wright
brothers' team had that Langley did wasn't luck. It was inspiration.
One was motivated by the prospect of fame and wealth, the other by
a belief. The Wright brothers excited the human spirit of those
around them. Langley paid for talent to help him get rich and
famous. The Wright brothers started with WHY. Further proof
Langley was motivated by WHAT, a few days after Orville and Wil-
bur took flight, Langley quit. He got out of the business. He could
have said, "That's amazing, now I'm going to improve upon their
technology." But he didn't. He found the defeat humiliating—his
own test flight had landed in the Potomac River, and the newspa-
pers all made fun of him. He cared so much about what others
thought of him, he was so preoccupied with becoming famous. He
wasn't first, so he simply quit.

96) Dream teams are not always so dreamy. When a team of experts
comes together they often work for themselves and not for the good
of the whole. This is what happens when companies feel the need to
pay mega-salaries to "get the best talent." Those people are not
necessarily showing up because they believe in your WHY, they are
showing up for the money. A classic manipulation. Paying someone
a lot of money and asking them to come up with great ideas ensures
very little. However, pulling together a team of like- minded people
and giving them a cause to pursue ensures a greater sense of
teamwork and camaraderie. Langley pulled together a dream team
and promised them riches. The Wright brothers inspired a group of
people to join them in pursuit of something bigger than each
member of the team. Average companies give their people
something to work on. In contrast, the most innovative or-
ganizations give their people something to work toward.

97) Companies with a clear
sense of WHY tend to ignore their competition, whereas those with
a fuzzy sense of WHY are obsessed with what others are doing

98) Southwest Airlines is famous for pioneering the ten-minute
turnaround—the ability to deplane, prep, and board a plane in ten
minutes. This ability helps an airline make more money, because the
more the planes are in the sky, the better the company is doing.

99) There was a stigma against speaking out. "People at the
London end of Barings," Leeson explained, "were all so know-all
that nobody dared ask a stupid question in case they looked silly in
front of everyone else." The lack of a clear set of values and beliefs,
along with the weak culture that resulted, created the conditions for
an every-man-for-himself environment, the long-term impact of
which could yield little else than disaster. This is caveman stuff. If
the people aren't looking out for the community, then the benefits of
a community erode. Many companies have star employees and star
salesmen and so on, but few have a culture that produces great
people as a rule and not an exception.

100) It was a classic blunder. He had forgotten he was part of
a team. He had forgotten that what made him so good at his job was
not just his ability. Jumper was one of the best because there were
others who were looking out for him. A massive infrastructure of
people he couldn't see.

101) With balance, those who are good fits can trust that everyone is
on board for the same reasons. It's also the only way that each
individual in the system can trust that others are acting to "leave the
organization in a better way than we found it," to quote General
Robinson again. This is the root of passion. Passion comes from
feeling like you are a part of something that you believe in, some-
thing bigger than yourself. If people do not trust that a company is
organized to advance the WHY, then the passion is diluted. Without
managed trust, people will show up to do their jobs and they will
worry primarily about themselves. This is the root of office
politics—people acting within the system for self-gain often at the
expense of others, even the company. If a company doesn't manage
trust, then those working for it will not trust the company, and self-
interest becomes the overwhelming motivation. This may be good
for the short term, but over time the organization will get weaker
and weaker

102) Energy motivates but charisma inspires. Energy is easy to see,
easy to measure and easy to copy Charisma is hard to define, nearly
impossible to measure and too elusive to copy. All great leaders
have charisma because all great leaders have clarity of WHY; and an
undying belief in a purpose or cause bigger than themselves. It's not
Bill Gates's passion for computers that inspires us, it's his undying
optimism that even the most complicated problems can being
solved. He believes we can find ways to remove obstacles to ensure
that everyone can live and work to their greatest potential. It is his 5
optimism to which we are drawn.

103) Over time, such tactics cost more
money and increase stress for employee and employer alike, and
eventually will become the main reason people show up for work
every day. That's not loyalty. That's the employee version of repeat
business. Loyalty among employees is when they turn down more
money or benefits to continue working at the same company.
Loyalty to a company trumps pay and benefits. And unless you're
an astronaut, it's not the work we do that inspires us either. It's the
cause we come to work for. We don't want to come to work to build
a wall, we want to come to work to build a cathedral.

===================================================================
104) Raised in Ohio, sixty miles from Dayton, Neil Armstrong grew up
on a healthy diet of stories about the Wright brothers. From a very
early age he dreamed of flying. He'd make model airplanes, read
magazines about flying and stare at the heavens through a telescope
mounted on the roof of his house. He even got his pilot's license
before he got his driver's license. With a childhood passion that
became reality, Armstrong was destined to become an astronaut.
For the rest of us, however, our careers paths are more like Jeff
Sumpter's.
===================================================================

105) Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was the leader, but he didn't change
America alone. Though Dr. King inspired the movement, to actually
move people requires organizing. As is the case with almost all
great leaders, there were others around Dr. King who knew better
HOW to do that. For every great leader, for every WHY-type, there
is an inspired HOW-type or group of HOW-types who take the
intangible cause and build the infrastructure that can give it life.
That infrastructure is what actually makes any measurable change
or success possible

106) WHY-types are the visionaries, the ones with the overactive
imaginations. They tend to be optimists who believe that all the
things they imagine can actually be accomplished. HOW-types live
more in the here and now. They are the realists and have a clearer
sense of all things practical. WHY-types are focused on the things
most people can't see, like the future. HOW-types are focused on
things most people can see and tend to be better at building
structures and processes and getting things done. One is not better
than the other, they are just different ways people naturally see and
experience the world. Gates is a WHY-type. So were the Wright
brothers. And Steve Jobs. And Herb Kelleher. But they didn't do it
alone. They couldn't. They needed those who knew HOW

107) Walt Disney began his career creating cartoon drawings for ad-
vertisements, but moved quickly to making animated movies. It was
1923 and Hollywood was emerging as the heart of the movie
business, and Walt wanted to be part of it. Roy, who was eight years
older, had been working at a bank. Roy was always in awe of his
brother's talent and imagination, but he also knew that Walt was
prone to taking risks and to neglecting business affairs. Like all
WHY guys, Walt was busy thinking about what the future looked
like and often forget he was living in the present. "Walt Disney
dreamed, drew and imagined, Roy stayed in the shadow, forming
an empire," wrote Bob Thomas, a Disney biographer. "A brilliant
financier and businessman, Roy helped turn Walt Disney's dreams
into reality, building the company that bears his brother's name." It
was Roy who founded the Buena Vista Distribution Company that
made Disney films a central part of American childhood. It was Roy
who created the merchandising business that transformed Disney
characters into household names. And, like almost every HOW-
type, Roy never wanted to be the front man, he preferred to stay in
the background and focus on HOW to build his brother's vision.

108) Most people in the world are HOW-types. Most people are quite
functional in the real world and can do their jobs and do very well.
Some may be very successful and even make millions of dollars, but
they will never build billion-dollar businesses or change the world.
HOW-types don't need WHY-types to do well. But WHY-guys, for
all their vision and imagination, often get the short end of the stick.
Without someone inspired by their vision and the knowledge to
make it a reality, most WHY-types end up as starving visionaries,
people with all the answers but never accomplishing much
themselves

109) Soft-spoken and almost always wearing a well-tailored three- piece
suit when he comes to work, Bruder looks like you would imagine a
conservative executive to look like. But don't assume you know how
things work simply based on what you see. Bruder is anything but a
stereotype. Though he has enjoyed the trappings of success, he is not
motivated by them. They have always been the unintended by-
product of his work. Bruder is driven by a clear sense of WHY. He
sees a world in which people accept the lives they live and do the
things they do not because they have to, but because no one ever
showed them an alternative. This is the lesson he was teaching his
daughters that day at the crosswalk—there is always another
perspective to be considered. That Bruder always starts with WHY
has enabled him to achieve great things for himself. But more
significantly, it is his ability to share his WHY through the things he
does that inspires those around him to do great things for
themselves.

110) It doesn't matter WHAT Ron Bruder does. The industries and the
challenges are incidental. What never changes is WHY he does
things. Bruder knows that, no matter how good an opportunity
looks on paper, no matter how smart he is and no matter his track
record, he would never be able to achieve anything unless there
were others to help him. He knows that success is a team sport He
has a remarkable ability to attract those who believe what he
believes. Talented people are drawn to him with one request: "How
can I help?"

========================================================================
111) In the course of trying to figure out what he could do, he made a
remarkable discovery that went much deeper than protecting his
daughters or even the prevention of terrorism in the United States.
In America, he realized, the vast majority of young people wake up
in the morning with a feeling that there is opportunity for them in
the future. Regardless of the economy, most young boys and girls
who grow up in the United States have an inherent sense of opti-
mism that they can achieve something if they want to—to live the
American Dream. A young boy growing up in Gaza or a young girl
living in Yemen does not wake up every day with the same feeling.
Even if they have the desire, the same optimism is not there. It is too
easy to point and say that the culture is different. That is not
actionable. The real reason is that there is a distinct lack of institu-
tions to give young people in the region a sense of optimism for
their future. A college education in Jordan, for example, may offer
some social status, but it doesn't necessarily prepare a young adult
for what lies ahead. The education system, in cases like this, per-
petuates a systemic cultural pessimism

Bruder realized the problems we face with terrorism in the West
have less to do with what young boys and girls in the Middle East
think about America and more to do with what they think about
themselves and their own vision of the future. Through the EFE
Foundation, Bruder is setting up programs across the Middle East to
teach young adults the hard and soft skills that will help them feel
like they have opportunity in life. To feel like they can be in control
of their own destinies. Bruder is using the EFE Foundation to share
his WHY on a global scale—to teach people that there is always an
alternative to the path they think they are on
========================================================================

112) In Yemen, children can expect to receive nine years of education;
This is one of the lowest rates in the world. In the United States,
children can expect sixteen years. Inspired by Bruder, Aleryani sees
such an amazing opportunity for young men and women to change
their perspective and take greater control of their own future. He set
out to find capital to jump-start his EFE operation in Sana'a,
Yemen's capital, and in one week was able to raise $50,000. The
speed at which he raised that amount is pretty good even by our
philanthropic standards. But this is Yemen, and Yemen has no
culture of philanthropy, making his achievement that much more
remarkable. Yemen is also one of the poorest nations in the region.
But when you tell people WHY you're doing what you're doing,
remarkable things happen.
